My name is Roman Makiev, I am
the head of the operational audit
department in a large thermostat company.
Today's course is based
on my previous experience.
I worked in consulting for 6 years,
the last is my position and from
the head of the direction, including
the direction of risk management.
And based on experience, there was
an introductory course in risk
management, in which I will stop on
how to apply risk management in your
company including.
Before I start the course, I will tell
you a few stories.
History the first.
There are problems in one
business all the time.
For example, in the part of the strategy,
that is, the region, it turned out
that the market capacity in this region
was 4 times smaller than planned.
Because of the fact that a currency contract
was concluded, they lost half of
their profits due to the fall of the dollar.
Because of the fact that the seller
resigned, they lost almost a third
of the sales.
The accountant departed, the accountant
department collapsed.
All data was lost in electronic
form, including customer contacts.
The inventory of the warehouse showed that
50 million
Ruby is missing, and it is
completely unclear to whom to hang it.
All this happens in a half year.
The business owner just doesn't know
what to do, works like a sort of anti-
crisis manager and, in general,
thinks, in the end, rather than
whether to sell this business
at all.
Another situation.
The situation, when everything in
the business is good, stable growth, and
stable growth in the last 5 years, there
are no special problems.
But again, and the owner
and the CEO, each top manager
tells you that if you do not
do anything right now, then
everything will be very bad.
That is, markets are falling,
production is aging, there is no staff.
The owner understands that
healthy grain is
in what sequence, he
can not determine.
At the same time, if you collect
all the wishes, who needs money,
then no money will be enough.
These two situations, you may not have
met them, but there is a situation
number 3.
Have you ever wondered why
projects don't work out?
They are, of course, not fulfilled
because they did not guess with
the market, that is, they
were wrongly predicted.
But this happens quite rarely.
Financial calculations, such
as arithmetic errors, of course,
occur, but they are not the cause.
That is, it seems like a good project, it
seems like a good manager of such a project,
but something is going wrong.
This is not the case with the direct losses
of the company.
That is, the project was unsuccessful.
What does all these three situations
combine?
All three situations are combined
by the fact that a risk management
system, if it exists, can either
prevent them or minimize
their consequences.
This is the solution to such situations
and will be devoted to today's course,
which will be called “Introduction to
Risk Management”.
This is precisely the “Introduction
to Risk Management”, that is, I will
not put but nevertheless, we will
consider the main actions when setting
up a risk management system,
in particular, how to identify
risks, how to calculate them.
We will build a risk map, I will
teach you how you can build this
risk map, develop activities
programmes, use
risk management decision
making.
Well, in conclusion, I will tell you
about how to quickly put it, that
is, this will be advice based on first
of all consultative practice.
The course is called “Introduction
to Risk Management”, first I will
tell you what Risk Management
is and give you the main terms
and definitions.
Next, we will fully look at the company
standard, that is, we will consider
how risks are identified, how they
are assigned the value of probability
and damage, how risk maps
are formed, what they are,
how the risk management program
should look, the program
of risk management
activities.
I will give an example of taking decisions
taking into account risks.
In conclusion, I will give some advice,
consider the organizational
structure of risk management, who
should take them, what should be the
sequence of actions of management
if management wants to avoid
those situations that I mentioned
in the introduction.
In conclusion, I will give a few advice.
The main goal I pursue
in this video course
is that each student can
make his first risk
map after the course.
I warn you immediately that it will probably
not be very accurate, but since risk
management is not a quick matter,
less than six months a year to learn
to understand all your risks and
more so to learn to manage them
in general is simply unrealistic,
in general it is normal,
still to return to the previous
one.
But in the end, this video course will help to start.
Let us start with the definitions
of what is risk management.
I will use the simplest definitions.
There are a lot of definitions.
The simplest, I think, definitions
are given to the standard company.
Risk is a combination of the probability of
events and their consequences.
You can see that it is short,
if you think, then most of both
negative and positive events
fall under this definition.
An event is the occurrence of
a certain conjunction of circumstances.
Risk management is coordinated
action to guide and control
an organization in areas
related to risk.
Risk management system is a set of
elements of the management
system of an organization
related to risk
management.
In general, simple and understandable.
Standard of the company.
How is the company decoded?
The company is a federation of European
risk managers associations.
By the first letters you can
create a company.
Risk management has been introduced
relatively recently.
This is the 21st century.
Standards are not strictly
approved standards.
Unlike the risk management standards
for banks in Basel, which are
mandatory in some countries.
These are the recommendations
that will allow a risk management
system.
These recommendations take very
little in volume.
That is, it is literally 16 pages.
They appeared in 2002, the initiator
of development was the British.
This is the creation of the entire
Federation.
There is a short translation
in Russian, but I do
not recommend using it.
Why is?
I will tell further.
You can see the name below.
How does the standard define the objectives
and tasks of risk management?
He also defines them as simply as possible.
The goal of risk management is
to give maximum sustainability to
all activities of the organization.
The main task of risk management is
identification, that is, identifying
risks and impacting them.
A distinctive feature
of modern risk management
is that not only negative
risks are considered,
but positive ones too.
What is Positive Risk?
This is the use of business
opportunities.
For example, you have a trading
network, you sell something there,
on those same squares you can also
sell not only that, but something else.
This is an opportunity.
You can go to another region,
that is an opportunity.
You can launch a new product, that'
s the opportunity.
This is how the risks are interpreted
by modern standards.
How does the risk management process define
the company's standard?
It all starts with strategic goals.
As one of my colleagues says,
a company without a strategy is a set
of assets loaded with liabilities.
If the company has no strategy, if
the owners do not understand what they
want to see from the company in 3-5 years,
then to say what the risks will
be quite difficult, because if we
do not know where to go, it is impossible
to say what awaits us on the
way.
Russian practice says that a small
number of companies have a
strategy in general.
They understand that in 3-5 years,
what should look like a business,
even fewer companies have
a formalized strategy so that
you can take it and read it.
This does not mean that the
risk management system should stop
putting, just you will have a significant
amount of risks associated
with the uncertainty
of the strategy.
Uncertainty can be very different,
and the consequences can also be very
different, let's look at a
little below.
Based on the results of the strategy, as
well as the results of the analysis of the current
state, you should make a risk diagnosis.
The risk assessment consists of three parts.
The first part is the identification of risks
and their description.
This is called risk analysis.
As part of this procedure, this
procedure is one of the longest at the
stage of establishing a risk
management system.
It is to her that we will pay special attention.
We need to get a very detailed description
of everything that first
threatens the organization, that
is, negative risks.
The second, which opportunities
are not used, is the positive risks.
The more detailed the description, the easier
it will be to form a program of activities.
Once we have all these risks described,
we must calculate them.
I always aim to
quantify the risks.
What is the probability in percentage,
what is the damage in millions of rubles,
in millions of dollars.
Maybe a qualitative description, but
we will stop later.
The very important point of the calculation
is to assess the risks, that is, to
determine their acceptability for
the organization.
Here very often confuse calculation and estimation,
in general, there is nothing
terrible about it.
But in this course, we will understood
the calculation of the assignment of
the value of probability and damage or consequences,
and under the evaluation this comparison
with some criteria and the determination
of the acceptability or inadmissibility
of risk for the organization.
The first document, called
the “Risk Report”,
should be produced.
This report, which should be considered
and specified including all risks,
and the Board of Directors should
actually determine the acceptability
on the basis of that report.
It happens a little differently, but
the standard is exactly like that.
On the basis of this report and
the Board of Directors' decision,
a risk management measure is being
developed, and a second document is
being developed – a risk management
program.
In general, the entire risk
management process, except for what
is necessary to close it up
with some monitoring of
results, and on the basis
of monitoring, it is natural
that the risks are always
re-identified.
That is, the risk card actually lives
for 1, 2, 3 months.
That is, any decision, any change
in the external environment leads
to a change in the risk map often
significant.
And this is a closed process, and
there is a risk management process,
and this process will avoid
negative consequences and use
the opportunities available for
any organization.
The company standard defines four types
of risk.
These are strategic risks,
financial risks, operational
risks and hazards risks.
They can have both these and two other
factors of occurrence.
These are external factors and internal factors.
Let us look at the existing
risks a little more detailedly.
Strategic risks are the most difficult
to identify risks, they are the largest
in scale, that is, the most damaging
risks for the organization.
First of all, they naturally include
the risks associated with the external
environment.
This is competition, it is a change
in industry legislation.
Related to the internal environment
is the absence of new developments.
The most difficult to calculate are financial
risks, these are currency rates, these
are interest risks, these are
credit risks.
Operational risks are usually
the most.
These risks are related
to business processes, these risks
are related to information systems.
The risks are traditional.
They all understand them best.
These are fires, floods and hurricanes.
Such a specific risk for Russia
is the risk of unfriendly absorption.
All risks are associated with theft, all
risks are dangerous.
In fact, they are most understandable,
as are the financial risks the
easiest to understand.
In terms of financial risks, it
is there,, the greatest mathematics,
the most complex mathematics,
we will not specially
stop at them, that is,
simply list.
More attention is paid
to strategic and operational
risks.
Why is?
Because they are the most difficult
to detect, they are far from obvious.
That is, if the list of financial risks
is universal, the list of risks
of dangers is simple enough
to form, then the list of strategic
risks and operational
risks is the most difficult.
Speaking about the risks, one
should mention another, the most
popular standard.
This standard is called COSA ERM.
It looks like a standard firm
in something, but in fact all
standards, as about the same thing,
in many ways cross.
In part, the standard itself
is an audit standard.
For me as an auditor, it is very
useful, but it is written by
auditors for auditors, in general,
this determines some complexity
of its use in ordinary life by
ordinary people.
Let us briefly explain what it is
made of.
First, each organization should
determine the level of pitit risk,
that is, what risk it is willing
to take when making strategic
decisions.
On the basis of this certain level,
decisions should be made
that do not exceed this risk.
Improving decision-making on risk
response, setting up a risk
management system, reducing
the number of unforeseen
events and losses, defining the
management of the entire set
of risks, using favorable
opportunities, not only negative
but also positive risks,
and rational use of capital,
is meant not only to whom how much
money to give, but also to
determine the capital
needs for the sustainable
development of the company.
There is always a cube in these standards,
it is represented on the right side of the
slide, the types of targets on which
the organization can take some risks.
Two types of goals, strategic goals,
operational goals, they coincide
with the standard of the firm.
The other two types of goals, the reporting
goals and the objectives in
the field of current
legislation, are taken from the
definition of internal control.
It doesn't matter what the classification
of goals or the classification
of types of risk is, it's just the standard
of the cost.
Special attention is paid to the
latter two, because the ERM is the
development of the standard of the
integrated framework.
It is clear that, however, internal
audit and internal control for
an organization that is public, that
is, the stock is listed on the stock
exchange, is primarily the reliability
of reporting and compliance
with the legislation.
What is risk management, this is
the second axis, it is the analysis
of the internal and external environment,
it is the setting of goals, that is,
what goals the organization should,
it is the definition of events, it is the
identification of risks, that is, there
are difficulties of translation,
it is the assessment of risks, that is,
the assessment of their acceptability,
it is the method of responding to risk,
what means of control, communication
information and the same monitoring.
If you pay attention, it is in many
ways the same, but there are three such
principled things in the case, these are
goals, risks, controls.
Unfortunately, in what this
degenerates, it degenerates into
a very detailed analysis of absolutely
all-all When considering each
business process, depending
on the level, there is a huge
amount of risks.
In general, again, I, as an auditor,
work with this very conveniently, on
the board of directors, the results
of the application of the ERM, in
general, in my opinion, to pull,
to represent not very well.
Well, the third, it symbolizes the
fact that each division is involved
in the risk management system,
this is also actually a standard
firm, I will tell you a little further.
So before we go to the direct
risk management procedures,
let us summarize
what is risk.
Risk is a combination of the probability of
events and their consequences.
The goal of risk management is
to give maximum sustainability to
all activities of the organization.
The main task of risk management
is to identify risks and
impact them.
There are two of the most popular
risk management standards.
There are more standards, of course,
including Russian, but two are most
often used - either the Federation
of the European Association
of Risk Managers or COSA ERM.
The COSA ERM standard is mandatory
for public companies,
for American public companies.
In general, if you are not going to be
on the US stock exchange in the next
3-5 years, then it is not mandatory for you.
In ordinary life, it is a little more
complex than a standard firm, primarily
because it does not contain
an algorithm of action.
The standard firm contains a detailed
description of the actions, so
it is more easily applied without
special training.
The standard firm strictly defines
the sequence of actions, because
we know that this is not a standard,
it is recommendations, then if
we will deviate from them a little,
then nothing terrible will
be.
Let's start with the identification
and methods that exist.
In fact, the methods
of identification are many.
I have grouped them into
three basic categories.
This is not, again, some truth
in the last instance.
Let's start with the methods that are
devoted to business analysis.
The first, the simplest, the most familiar
is the swedish analysis.
I will not stop in detail on it,
because since you are studying
for an MBA, you should know.
The only thing I will say is that such
a traditional swed-analysis, which
often occurs, is written within 10-
15 minutes, it is not a
normal swed-analysis, and it will
not help to identify risks.
Remember that there are threats and there are opportunities.
If you detail them as part
of the swedish analysis, they
will be your risks both negative
and positive.
The next type of possible business
analysis is course analysis, that
is, business-political,
economic, social-technological.
Together with the following, that
is, esp analysis, political,
economic, socio-
technological, legal, environmental,
it is the consideration of
all aspects of business from
these positions.
It is very effective for identifying
strategic risks, very effective
in terms of coverage completeness,
in terms of meaningful
risks that can be seen.
For operational risks, I recommend
using business processes.
There can be a lot of risks,
so I will show you how
to reduce them.
A very important method of risk analysis
is the analysis of business continuity.
Business continuity analysis
is based on the fact that we model
a situation that can lead to a stop.
The situation can be very
different, for example, power
outages, fire.
But there are more significant things,
such as unfriendly acquisition,
such as the fall of some
markets.
We model what we can do, form
a business continuity plan.
The next method is the analysis
of production systems.
I will not stop in the lesson in detail on
them, everything will be in the textbook
their description.
In general, the methods are universal, but
the identified risks will vary greatly
from industry to industry.
The following methods of identification
of risks are organizational methods,
these are favorite
consulting methods.
I will stop at them in detail, because
you will have to use them
all in one way or another.
First is the questionnaire.
You form a questionnaire, the simplest
questionnaire is what risks are,
the number of cases per year,
and you spread among
the maximum number of people.
Why does the method not work well?
First, as with any questionnaire from
the outside, no matter what, whether
it is a psychologist, the attitude is very specific.
I assure you, if you give, then the case
of falling brick on the head will be
listed in each second questionnaire.
Few people see the big strategic
risks.
The risks may be
identified somehow.
However, the method is useful
because there are one, two, three
risks that are specific
to this organization, which
you may not know even with your
risk base, and it may fall
into the questionnaire.
The next method is working groups.
The most effective method is to gather
5-6 people in one place who sincerely
want to learn about risk management,
sincerely care about the
future of their organization.
Along with a good moderator who should
be there, a risk manager can
act, the results will be very
good in the right direction,
when telling about certain
methods of indoctrination.
A group of people living at the enterprise
will be happy to tell you everything
during the afternoon.
Here, brain attack is a variant
of the working group method.
In a brain attack, everyone sits in
a circle and starts to attack.
It all depends on the moderator.
If the moderator is good, he can direct
the group, then throwing the idea into the
crowd, he will do everything himself.
If the moderator is not qualified
enough, a traditional date
for brain strokes may occur.
They sat for half a day, not revealing
anything, but they talked.
A very important audit method.
When identifying risks, first
require all audit reports.
I am not only talking about the audit
reports of the external audit
report, but also about the results of
the internal audit, the results of the
environmental audit, the
results of the technological audit.
They meet up.
Reports are large, the key risks you will
definitely find out about them.
What methods to use?
The answer is simple.
Apply all, both organizational and
analytical, and for production
method of analysis of production
systems.
There is some specificity in their
application, but after applying all,
I think you will close the risk with
a good 80-95% probability.
The key is identification of risks.
Although risk identification can
be carried out by independent
consultants, an assessment
carried out within the company,
with close interaction of its services,
with consistent
and coordinated use of the
processes and tools presented,
is likely to be more
effective.
What does this mean?
This means that it is possible to determine
the risk, but using the knowledge
of the organization itself,
using the knowledge of employees,
this assessment will be
more effective.
Why not read the Russian
translation?
In Russian translation, of course,
consultants wrote, so this phrase
is replaced by the phrase that
risk assessment is usually carried
out by external consultants.
Everyone makes money as they can.
An external consultant can greatly
speed up this process.
Practice shows that 1-2 months
with the help of an external
consultant - it can even be a lot, if
without it, then the procedure less
than two months is unlikely to take.
But, nevertheless, always remember
that you need to work closely
with the entire management
of the organization, with all the staff.
It will be more efficient.
To identify risks,
to identify them.
First, we need a business strategy.
If there is no formalized strategy,
then a series of interviews will be required.
If there are more than one owners,
you will see that they are likely
to have a different view of the company'
s development.
This can also identify
certain risks.
The second thing that will be needed is all
the data on the economy.
First, the industry data,
macroeconomic data.
How the industry lives, what is its
position, is there no threat from external
big for the industry as a whole.
Second, at least the reporting.
Reporting is better management, reporting
is better with decryptions.
You will most likely need a product
margin to identify such threats
related to the current position
in the market.
In Russia, traditionally, data on
the scheme of financial
and economic activity,
on the legal structure are needed.
Needed for what?
Assessment of tax risks.
Unfortunately, most of our
use different tax optimization
methods, including not
very legal ones.
To assess the risks, you need to understand the
scale of the disaster.
Information about the management system is very important.
Organic structure, processes,
internal control – all of this
needs to be analyzed to identify
risks.
The traditional problem
of organ structure is when
one top management has
both planning, accounting,
analysis and execution.
The problem of processes
is the lack of any internal control.
Since I am an internal auditor and
have worked as a consultant before,
I can say about absolutely every business
that the excellence of
non-internal control can reduce
a significant amount of current
risks.
Regulation of certain processes
and clear implementation will
reduce the likelihood of problems
many times.
If the production business and trade
too, then this state of equipment,
the audit data, which the audit
revealed.
In the case of a strong internal
auditor in the company, it
may be that everything else is
not needed, because as part
of the audit function, the above
is checked and familiarity
with the audit reports will allow
you to easily
identify risks.
This list is not complete, the list
is determined each time.
You will face the risk of
identifying that you will
always need some information.
Information can be very different,
from the decoding of the report to the
year of release of a particular compressor.
Don't be ashamed, ask, you'
ll have to run.
Let us go to the example.
A conditionally-mechanical plant, the
example concerns not only the identification
of risks, but also all subsequent
actions to set up risk management
systems.
A usual small factory, located
in a small village of the urban
type, a stable position in
some market, here is written "monopoly",
in fact under "monopoly" is
understood that it clearly occupies
more than half the market,
such a good factory.
Such ones really exist.
A large number of workers, 5,000
of 60, is clearly a
city-forming enterprise.
To simplify, let's assume that it is
a public company, that is, the shares
are quoted, say, in RTS.
Capitalization is not very large, such
enterprises are actually not, but for
simplification is suggested.
The revenue is 4 billion rubles,
net profit is 400 million.
Consider as an example, how on the
basis of pistoleanalytics
to identify the risks of such
a small enterprise.
The first letter of the “P” is politics.
We will start with my favorite
method of pistol, look at each
letter and try to understand
what could threaten
the plant.
It starts with the letter “P”
– political analysis.
In general, political analysis is traditionally
associated with strange, that is,
country risk.
If we go to Africa, and in Africa
the government changes
frequently enough, war often
enough, that is actually
a political risk.
In Russia, everything is much easier,
in Russia, every business depends
on the governor, depends
on the legislative assembly, depends
on the executive, so the first
risk that is is a change of
the governor.
Let us consider the economy.
Here I will look at not only the economy,
but also business, because this is an
element of BPS analysis.
What is threatening the economy?
First, the increased competition,
the competition in our
local markets.
Separately, I suggest considering
the risk that the enterprise is, of
course, a monopoly, but there are
some factories that are trying to compete.
In Russia, it is unlikely that
anyone will succeed, but if
our competitor is bought by foreign
companies that are also
specialized in these markets,
then we can get a fairly large
number of problems.
If we are not ready for this, then
we and the market can get out very
quickly.
This risk is also very specific,
when the profitability
of the whole industry drops
significantly.
The risk is for almost all industries.
The fact is that in the late 1990s,
trade rarely worked at a rate
of less than 100%.
In general, with increased competition
such a raspberries will almost not remain.
And you need to be prepared for
the fact that if you have an
ebedda rate of 50%, then most likely
in a few years it will fall to
20-30%, if you do not take
any measures.
The next letter is the letter S, which
is social analysis.
There is also a lot of talk
about social responsibility.
You understand that in a town-type
settlement, urban enterprises are
more than socially responsible,
so consider such a risk as the increase
in costs for the maintenance
of the social sphere.
In fact, there may be
such a remarkable risk in
social commitments as the inability
to dismiss excess staff,
but as far as I know, this
risk is not very relevant
for most now.
But the growth of the costs ofining
the social sphere is more
than a real risk, that
is, the urban enterprises should
be prepared for what everything
from playgrounds to repair
of communications in this
village will have to do.
The following risks are
technological, letter T.
Let us identify such risks as the
lag behind of the technologies used.
What is Risk?
The risk is due to the fact that
the energy intensity is significantly higher
than the competitors.
A good example is aviation.
While petroleum was cheap, our
aircraft, even the old ones, were quite competitive.
Now, when the difference between the Tu-
154 and the Boeing 737 is about twice
the fuel consumption, the Tu-154 is
clearly less competitive.
In addition to the lag behind in
the technologies used, the lack of
new products is also a technological risk.
The fact is that every product has a
life cycle, a writing machine,
an audio player, a cassette.
If we don't have a new product,
it will lead to the fact that the
business will actually stop.
We will consider that for our conditional
plant this risk is also very
relevant.
The next letter, letter L, is
a legal risk.
We are looking at changes
in industry legislation.
There are a few examples from the
recent past, i.e. the beginning of the 21st
century.
First, the pharmaceutical markets, that
is, production must be certified
according to the new standards.
For many it was
quite tense.
There are changes in the construction
market, there are changes in the engine
production market, but there will
be changes in other industries.
We will consider that this is also threatening
for our factory.
The letter E is ecology.
This is a very typical risk associated
with the use of the water environment.
The ban on the discharge of springwater,
you understand what it is
for an industrial enterprise, it
is actually its stop, or huge investments
in the creation of a closed
circuit.
The expansion of the pistole analysis, the booklets
E and D, is education and demography.
So, in the part of education, everyone
knows that the PTU system has collapsed,
the school system is becoming
as if it is getting worse and worse,
there is a lack of qualified personnel,
especially the lack of qualified
personnel when working
on complex equipment.
Therefore, for our mechanical plant
there is a risk of lack of personnel
with the required qualifications.
While we only mean engineers
and workers, the risk is actually
wider.
That is, the risk concerns, say, for trading
companies, these are sellers,
trade representatives.
For all companies that plan
to form reporting, it is a shortage
of accountants who know international
standards.
In general, in Russia, the transition
can happen very quickly on them and
this is the problem, that is, every
business will get problems with
the fact that it can not form the
reporting there properly.
I will focus on the letter D.
The letter D is demography.
Everyone knows that in the
1990s we had some failure
in birth.
That is, in the 93rd year, relative
to the 88th year, the birth rate fell
almost twice and the number, if
you look at the data in the state statistics,
the number of 15-19-year-olds,
is about twice the number
of 20-25-year-olds.
And this decline, it will affect
absolutely every business.
The simple thing is that in different
differently, that is, those that
prefer to recruit young people,
it will affect already there in
a near future, that is, 2010-
2011, there will be problems.
For manufacturing, that is, for
that require neocor will
happen a little later, but
it will definitely happen.
Therefore, consider such a risk
as a decline in population.
We will consider it not because we lack
the previous risk, the risk is
associated with the fact that the
capacity of the markets, when people
physically become twice as small,
and you, for example, focus
on your sales on 15-year-olds, no
matter what, textbooks, candy,
then the market, a priori,
should drop twice, because
the people will be less.
Here we have looked at an example
of how to identify risks using pestley
and analysis.
This is the most effective analysis,
revealing a lot of
strategic risks.
As for financial risks, they
are the same for every company.
Therefore, consider another method
of identification of risks,
which allows you to identify
operational risks, as an example.
Identification of risks by
business processes.
The first risk is that the process
is either absent, or incorrectly
formalized, or is incorrectly
performed in its entirety.
A very typical example is marketing.
If you have a marketing
division structure, if you
have a marketing division board,
it doesn't mean you have
marketing.
That is, it doesn't mean you really
know the market, you understand
what your competitors are winning
from, and you really understand
what products you need to develop.
Another example is the management
of stock.
Stock stocks are managed
by everyone, but a few, as a
consultant, I saw where it
was absent, the effect is
achieved within 3-4 months when
it was put in place.
The next risk is the misuse
of information or its loss.
Particularly pay attention to
the wrong movement to the order
of coordination in strategic
planning, in investment planning.
Less consequences will be, but also will
be, if there are such problems
in the budgeting system, when
the starting data for calculating
different plans is a little different.
The next risk is the wrong performance
of the work.
But this is already a lower level
of risk compared to the risk
of a lack of process and the
risk of a wrong allocation of powers.
This risk is also very interesting
in terms of internal control, planning,
execution, including contract conclusion,
accounting and analysis
in one person.
This potentially leads to
someone using the company'
s money or, roughly
speaking, to fraud.
This example allows us to understand
how the risks are identified in the
process example.
You can see, ideally, the process
should be painted.
If it is really drawn, then the
usual camera analysis, when a
person sits in the office and analyzes
processes, most of the risks
will be identified.
I will note something more.
At our stage, for the formation of
risk maps, we do not need very
detailed lists of risks.
The fact is that if you
look at the process as
well, you will see hundreds
of risks, no less, the
most diverse, from losing
the paper to some strategic
risks.
For the audit, this description is very useful.
For you as a top manager, it is not possible.
If the process goes wrong,
combine all these small risks
into one major risk and try
to assess the consequences
of the whole process being wrong.
Let us present a list of the risks
of the conditional mechanical plant.
We identified strategic risks
with a slightly advanced
analysis.
The financial risks are the same everywhere.
Within the framework of our plant we will
consider currency, credit risk, risk
of loss of liquidity.
What is the risk of loss of liquidity?
This is when we were borrowed,
borrowed and for some reason
we are not given money, or there
was some gap because we were waiting
for a large payment.
Very interesting risk, very interesting
consequences.
The consequences can range from breaking
relations with all major counterparties
to minimizing consequences.
The point is that the risk can be significant,
so it needs to be managed.
We are not considering interest
risk here, because it is unlikely
that medium-sized will take
loans attached to Libor
or Euro-Ibor.
Consider the price slicers, when
the price of raw materials is rising
sharply, and we cannot transfer these
costs to the consumer.
A very good example is agriculture
for companies that work
with large retail chains.
Milk, for example, is seasonally
expensive, and it can be expensive
depending on the year twice, and
we have fixed prices for supply.
So either we are forced to
stop the supply, but this means
a break, the development of
all the relations with this network,
or we are forced to trade for
a while to lose.
Of course, the risk of tax
claim, and in Russia this risk
is very specific because even
if you are very good in accounting,
you have very strong methodologies,
you have decent accountants,
the risk still persists.
Not so much money losses arise, as
you are exposed to a large risk,
no matter what, even a little
bit of imagination in the scale
of the enterprise's revenue,
the counterparties begin to
treat you very curiously.
In the case of our small
plant we will not calculate image
losses, we will simply calculate
based on a specific scheme
of financial and
economic activity,
otherwise it is also called
aggressive tax optimization,
how much can be
assigned to us.
The same risk that I attribute to
the financial is the risk of increasing
the cost of construction, that is,
the same price jump, that is, the
same jump in the price of raw materials
for services, leads to the
fact that business plans are
also broken.
The next type of risk is operational
risk, as already shown, is
identified mainly in the analysis
of the management system.
The first risk, let's say that this
is the inefficiency of our
marketing company, yes, of course,
50% of the marketing costs
are usually superfluous, yes, and
the problem is that we don't know
what 50% but here the marketing costs
are not very large, say, 100
million rubles, but here we have
all the reasons to believe
that about half of these costs
are superfluous, yes.
We will not blame marketers
for this, but we will
simply say that 50% is
used inefficiently.
The next point also arises due to
the analysis of processes.
The key in sales is to
provide discounts.
We have seen that discounts
are not given very transparently,
so we can say that we do
not receive some sort of revenue
from sales, we also announce
that risk.
Furthermore, the risk associated
with the management of commodity
inventories, we, of course, even have
a little, but there is a suspicion
that we may grow unliquid, we also
declare this a risk.
The inefficiency
of research and development
works, it is such, it is inefficiency,
very traditional for Russia, unfortunately,
many units, especially at
factories, do not perform their
function, something they are, of
course, engaged in, something
can be very necessary, but as
it usually happens, either invent
a bike, or can not bring to
a logical completion,
that is, before introduction
into production.
Another risk is the excess of
staff, remember that the urban enterprises,
if we put a new line, then the new
line of import production, as a
rule, replace the whole workshop,
and it may be that 300-500 people
in us will be superfluous, to
drive them out on the street,
in general, it is not possible,
it will be wrong.
Well, again, including from the point
of view that it will be necessary to strengthen
the protection of both the factory and
top managers, because the enterprise
is small, everyone knows each
other.
The growth in the cost of social
content, we have identified in the gun analysis.
Leaving top managers is a very
traditional risk.
Pay attention to who
your sales are locked for.
If all sales are locked only
one person, his care, and care can
be very different, may the competitor's
leave, maybe just the individual
is tired, maybe something happened
to the family, no matter what,
it may prove that such care will
simply lead to failure in
the implementation of
the business plan at least.
That is, business strategically will
not suffer, but problems on the
horizon of six months to years we
have a huge number.
We also include this risk.
Risk associated with the implementation of projects.
Well, let's be, there are projects
in every company.
Projects can be very different, for
example, a project to implement
information systems, a project
to build a new production, a
project, after all, to reorganize.
Each of these projects we will
look at below in which decisions
what risks may be, can
potentially lead to some risks.
Well, let's consider the specific
risk for this enterprise, because
its shares are listed on the stock
exchange, that is, the probability
that, say, the free fleet is
large enough that someone will
buy, will become a large mining
shareholder, that is, possessing
a block package.
The problems, you understand, if it is
an oligarch, then the problems for business
are ensured.
In terms of danger, the risks are quite standard.
Fire at the main production, power
outages, loss of information systems
data, in addition to the traditional
consider the specific risk
associated with the breakdown
of the main water supply pipes.
Suppose that such a pipe passes through
the territory of our plant, it
breaks there once every 10 years,
it floods the main workshops,
and nothing can be done about this,
because the infrastructure,
its property is unclear, what
happens too, to whom it belongs,
whether it is a factory or
a city.
In general, repairing it is useless,
once every 10 years is not so
often, but the risk of such there is.
The next risk, please note, is inherent
in many, when a key supplier,
at least for reasons of hazard
risks, fire at the main
production, will not be able
to fulfill its obligations.
There is a supplier, all of
you are satisfied, and it delivers
in the cost structure of 20-25%, you
can not replace it quickly with anyone,
and any of its problems will affect
your business in this way.
At the same time, like us, he is
relative, that is, there are other
manufacturers, but something worth
it can only be purchased from him.
Penal sanctions are also such
a traditional risk, not under
contracts, penal sanctions by third
parties, too, can be very different,
and the risks associated with
internal control, are the outbursts
in commercial activities,
it is theft.
In terms of internal control, between
these two operational
risks and hazard risks, it
is often difficult to distribute
the risk.
Well, for example, we see that we bought
something at a price of 10% more expensive,
the risk of danger is a malicious intent,
but the malicious intent is generally something
that needs to be proven, so it is probably
impossible to attribute this risk
to the risk of danger, but nevertheless,
this risk actually arises from the
process.
However, we refer to it simply
because it is so easier
to show that such dangers exist.
Well, the last risk to consider
for each of the is the
risk of unfriendly
acquisition.
In the case of our plant,
say, they are interested
in some large corporation,
we mean a state corporation,
and in the near future this
risk can be realized.
From the identification, what can I say?
First, pay attention to the
amount of risk.
They, on the one hand, should not
be very few, that is, if you see only
10 risks, then you obviously did
not notice something, on the other
hand, there should not be a lot of them.
If you have two hundred, then
obviously some of them can be enhanced.
They are either the same by
nature or by effects.
This is a small art of risk management,
that is, there should be
no much risk.
Often it may be that the same
reason leads to both
strategic and operational losses.
Let's say with the staff,
we may lack strategically staff,
this is the bigger way, and
in the operational activities
of personnel may also be
lacking.
It's not something terrible, either
consider one or consider
the other, how important it is to you.
And finally, what should be noted?
Consider the risks according
to the scale of your business.
The fact is that a small
business, unlike a large,
can only manage very
small risks.
For a large business, considering
the risks are small, it simply
does not need to.
Let me explain by example trade.
If you have two bars, then the risk
of joining the WTO you can, of
course, consider, but, in general,
it is probably not your risk.
On the other hand, if you have a
large business, then fires, then
theft in these trading facilities for
you are more than real, moreover, it
is your life, and they will be a hundred
percent.
In this case, you need to change the risk
from theft to the risk of increasing theft,
that is, you have a certain level, and
for you there is a risk that this
level will be significantly exceeded.
The same with other risks.
For strategic risks, a large company
should fear global competitors,
a small company should fear,
probably, also global competitors,
but on its territory.
That is, if it is next to his lark
that a competitor will put.
This is art, so when you are
performing a task for your business,
consider this, please, because
if the business is not very
big, then strategic risks you
can not manage in any
way, but at the same time
it does not mean that the
activity needs to be stopped.
Yes, indeed, there are
a few strategic risks that will
lose the business entirely,
but to live in entrepreneurship
is also a risk.
We have identified risks, that is, we
have identified them, but for further
effective work on the establishment
of risk management systems they
need to be described in some way.
The purpose of this description
is to provide a structured representation of
all identified risks.
Example of a standard firm.
The table is quite large,
I honestly don't like to fill it.
What does it contain?
It contains the name of risk, that
is what was above.
The risk area is a detailed description
of what is happening, what consequences
will be if events are
implemented.
The nature of risk is the type of
risk, i.e. strategic, financial,
operational, or risk of dangers.
The interested party is the one who is
affected by the risk.
Note that the interested party
is not necessarily suppliers,
staff, it can also be the
public, it can be all kinds
of ecology, in bad cases
- the prosecutor.
The quantitative definition of risk
will be considered a little later.
Ideally, there should be a calculation
of the probability of damage, but it is permitted
for decision making, simply to
say, it is meaningful to us, or not
very significant.
Acceptable risk, acceptable
risk is the same.
Risk management mechanisms
are existing so-called
primary mechanisms.
What is already in place
to minimize possible losses?
For example, the risk of personnel,
the risk of staff, the risk
of staff shortage.
We already have some programs there,
probably recruitment of personnel,
selection of retention programs
– this is what is already there.
Possible improvement
mechanisms and what can be improved.
And developing a company policy
strategy is actually who should
be responsible for this risk.
Here is a table.
The more detailed it is, the better.
You can not fill it, I recommend
another form at the end.
In general, the most difficult part
– the identification of risks – is over.
What have we learned?
The four types of risk analysis methods
are enough to apply them most
likely all together.
Analysis methods are based on the analysis
of business in the internal external
environment and organizational methods,
i.e. the interaction of employees
in identifying risks.
For hazard risks, risk assessment of
large production facilities there
is a special set of methods.
I will not read this video in this
course, watch the method.
There should be not a lot of risks,
there is no clear value of the recommended,
but if they are less, again, 50-15-
20, you have not noticed something,
if more than 100, then they are most
likely advisable to amplify,
and in order to be able to apply
further risk management,
that is, to full efficiency, the
risks should be described as
detailed as possible.
The example of description, again, is
a method, there is a short example.
If you describe the risk
on half pages, the worse it will not
actually be, because the more detailed
the risk is, the easier it is to form
action programs.
After the risk is identified, the
risk must be calculated.
Risk calculation is of three types.
There is a calculation of
risks quantitative, when the probability
is calculated in a specific value
of the percentage, and the damage
or other consequences are brought
to the monetary amount.
It is semi-quantitative when we
indicate certain intervals.
For example, the damage is from
10 to 100 million rubles, that
is, from 0 to 10, from 10 to 100 and
from 100 and above.
And it is quite qualitative when
we operate the concepts of high,
large, medium, small, than
the difference.
In principle, both are risk management,
but the problem with a purely
qualitative approach is that it
is very uncomfortable to appeal.
A lot is how much.
Once you get to the number 5 million, 10
million, 100 million, it will be easier
to communicate with everyone.
That is, we understand that the probability
of our damage is high, that is,
in percentage of damage.
The quantitative approach is a little better.
Moreover, we will continue
to use expectation mat and in it
too can somehow estimate expectation
mat.
But still, always aim to quantify
the risks, trying to show
that it is not very
difficult.
Calculation of consequences.
There are three levels: high,
medium and low.
High is a significant
impact on the company'
s strategy or operations.
What is the significant impact on the
strategy?
This will require some additional
capital.
That is, the company risks something
more than the current profit.
Average is a moderate
impact on the strategy when we
lose money, but not so much
and the strategy is likely
not to be changed.
That is, we will still be able to
develop, we will still be able to
bring new products to the market.
As a rule, the average level is a significantly
not very large percentage
of the profit.
Well, low is when the value of the
financial impact on the company.
Money is a pity, but not
critical.
Now, we go to the probability calculation.
The most difficult here.
The fact is that if the damage
can be tasted, it can eventually
be counted as the cost
structure of events.
That is, to count fuel and energy,
costs, wages, charges, raw
materials, materials, that
is, we will lose.
It is probably the most difficult.
So try to pay special attention
to these subsequent
slides.
How is the probability of a negative
risk assessed?
Conditionally speaking, the probability
is considered high if an event is
possible several times over a certain
period, for example, 10 years.
This corresponds to a probability of more
than 25%.
Between 2 and 25 percent,
the probability is more than
once over a period of time.
That is, once 3, 4, 5 years the event
can happen, but this means the probability
is less than 25%, and less than 2% the
probability is considered low.
To simplify, for negative
events, what can be done?
In general, there is such a thing as
a reserve, say, in the reporting.
If you know that events happen
every 5 years, it means that
you need to form a reserve in
the amount of the cost of the event
and annually form one-fifth of
the reserve needed to repay
the risk.
Here such a simple interpretation
will allow enough quickly
for any risk to any user, any
person who applies risk management,
who tries to calculate
risk and assess.
That is, if this happens
once every 3 years, then the
probability can be defined as 33%.
In fact, for strategic
risks, it is about the
same.
If we know that we can have
a big competitor in 3-5 years,
then we can prepare for it.
Again, somehow understand
how much money we will need
to fight this competitor
for 3-5 years to form
the necessary reserves.
Calculating probability is the most
difficult moment to understand.
In fact, it is quite simple in
terms of immediate action, but
it is a bit more difficult to
understand.
Because the calculation of damage is understandable,
in the end, you can calculate the
direct costs of elimination.
How much money will be needed,
it is easy to get it out.
There are certain difficulties
in the probability.
What does the company standard recommend?
He recommends three probability
values, namely high, medium
and low.
High probability is when
an event can occur several
times over a period
of time.
The time interval is recommended
to take ten years.
If you have 3-4 times in 10 years
something can happen, then the probability
is high and corresponds
to more than 25%.
If you can have it 1-2 times in 10
years, then the probability
should be assigned from 2 to
25.
If the event is rare, in the recent past,
it has not been, then the probability
should be estimated less than
2%.
A simpler option to
understand is based on
some reserve of funds.
If you know that you have an event
that happens once every 3-4-5 years,
then it means that every year
you need to reserve one, third,
fourth, fifth of the value.
If we decide to hold the risk so that
it does not become unexpected
for us to cover it, then the probability
can be estimated in just 5 years,
it is 20%.
Why is?
Because you can hold 20%
of the cost.
This understanding may not be quite
consistent with the ideology of risk
management, but it is easier for ordinary
people to understand it.
In terms of positive risks, a slightly different
scale.
The probability of a positive risk is
considered to be high if there is
a favorable outcome during the year,
that is, a value of more than
75% is assigned.
A low risk probability is unlikely
to be achieved, and we can use it
when the probability is less
than 25%.
In the meantime, this is the average
probability, that is, it is possible.
Some modification of probability for
calculations, less than 2%, from 2
to 25% for negative risks, this isined.
The standard is modified in some way.
Modified as?
There is a sum of events, positive
and negative, the probability of
the sum of events will be one, since
a positive event, low probability,
is less than 25%, that is, it is
unlikely it will happen within
a year, then for a negative event
we can immediately say that the
probability of more than 75% is that
it will happen within a year.
Here is a small modification, another
point for the calculation of
probability, which will allow you
to quickly learn to count these probability.
A special note for manufacturers
who are familiar with the declaration
on industrial safety
and the existing methods
of GOR Technadzor, there
is a probability is not
considered quite true.
In ideology, methods are considered
correct, in ideology, risk management,
in the ideology of the firm is considered
not quite correct.
Because 10-2 is considered to be
a risk quite common.
10-2 as we know is the easiest
to imagine in just 100 years.
In general, from what I saw in the
declaration on industrial security,
once every 100 years, no event
occurs, it occurs much
more often.
And when I see that for the most
likely event, which actually
occurs almost quarterly, the
probability estimate of 10-2
is clearly wrong.
Moreover, when we want to
reserve, many such events
need to simply reserve,
funds to eliminate them, such
a calculation will not allow
us to do so.
All about calculation, all about
standard.
There are two principles of risk
calculation.
How can they be counted.
This is an expert, even
more detailed,
expert-analysis and statistical
method.
What is a good expert method?
The expert method is good in its simplicity.
That is, you can very quickly sit in
a circle and estimate the probability
of absolutely each of the above risks
from 2 to 95% very quickly.
The damage is also estimated
quite quickly.
However, in the expert method there is a
chance to get a not very correct assessment
because of what.
Because of the composition of the expert
group, in the end I will tell you that many
experts, especially from business, tend
to underestimate their risks.
The second is the composition of the
expert group, that is, the people you
attracted.
It may be that people are not really
highly qualified and do not understand
the processes themselves.
In this case, it turns out that in general,
the estimate on the principle of
the half-finger ceiling, it is probably not
very necessary.
In statistical methods, there is
another problem.
If there is statistics, it should
always be used.
The problem is that statistics may
not be available.
First, it may not take into account
the changes that have occurred.
For example, we have statistics
on small theft.
And here we look at it as if it
should not grow.
But in fact there are some enters,
like there has changed that a hole
in the fence appeared, and theft
will actually grow great.
It is not always possible to evaluate
statistics.
Statistical methods where they
work very well?
They work very well in banks when evaluating
scoring systems.
It works well wherever there
is a lot of information.
I, honestly, in industrial enterprises
never are effective,
especially in terms of the
effective application of
a complex mathematical
apparatus.
But I must say that they
exist.
If necessary, they can be used.
When there is a huge amount of
information, well, for example, banks,
the estimate of a particular borrower,
when the number of loans is 10,
000, it is a good statistic, and we can
apply different scoring systems there.
It can be used in
industry, in commerce.
To be honest, I have never seen
such a successful application, let'
s say, of what can't be done by
simple analytics without the application
of mathematics.
In summing up the section on the calculation
of risks, there are three types of
risk assessment, that is, qualitative,
semi-qualitative and quantitative.
The best quantity.
How to estimate the damage is
quite simple.
In terms of the probability
calculation, showed some example, that
is, to estimate, I think you can.
There are two methods of risk
calculation, expert and statistical.
Statistics are better, but
statistics are not always enough,
so the expert method is very
often used.
It should be applied
with caution, and applied with
caution it will show
a fairly good result.
Now back to our conditional
mechanical plant.
The complete method of calculation of damage is
in a separate column in the method.
Here, I would point out that both expert
methods and statistical methods were used.
What types of risk methods
are used?
First, for strategic, it is easier
to estimate through the
fall in business value.
Since the company is public,
we have some business value,
we can say.
That's why, if you remember, I said
that for a public company,
it's a little easier to calculate
the risk because we know that
one thing or another can lead to that.
For example, a conflict with
the governor, the appearance of a major
player on the market will most likely
reduce our capitalization.
However, the expert method can
also be used in combination
with the statistical, that
is, for example, for the risk
of outbound we know some cash
flow, we use some analytics on
catch-do-catch and determine, going
from internal control, as a percentage
of the cash flow that someone
can sit on so that we
do not notice.
Such examples, expert,
analytical, are enough.
We always identify a stream and
estimate how much we can lose.
Statistics is not just about
accidents.
There is a situation where a fire plant
occurs once every 10 years.
Or once every 2-3 years there
is a power outage for one and
a half days, because we still
have a village of urban type.
Therefore, statistical methods are
usually used for hazard risks,
in the case of industrial
accidents.
However, the statistical method may
also be applied to other types
of risks, such as operational risk.
The risk of providing excessive
discounts with sufficient analysis
is very clear, where discounts
could not be given.
It can also be estimated as a percentage
of any flow.
Or as a third of the amount of discounts.
Per the risk is statistical outside of the
field, 10 products have recently
been developed, 5 have passed into a
series, 2 have been successful.
In general, I will repeat again that
the statistical methods are ideally
better, but most often, especially
if the task is to form the first
risk map, it is worth the task
to show enough and expert.
The risk is important
to be quantified.
You see, both expert methods
and statistical methods can be
used to calculate different risks.
Again, I will emphasize, statistically
better, but in the first stage,
when forming the first risk
map, you will most
likely use only expert
ones first.
Why is?
Because statistics can be
a long look, but experts
are not so bad, especially
for the first.
The final point of diagnosing risks
after we have identified
and calculated them, they must
be assessed, that is, compared
to some acceptable value.
To assess, I am still forced to
use such a concept as mathematical
expectation.
For us, it is enough for now that
mathematical expectation is a
product of the probability of damage.
Example is on the slide.
A 40% probability means that within
10 years, 4 times or 1 time will
occur 2.5 code.
To cover this risk at the expense
of our own reserves, we need
to reserve from 80 million
32 million rubles annually.
What is risk assessment?
Risk assessment is the comparison
of a calculated value of risk
with an acceptable value.
First, we must determine what is
acceptable for us and what is unacceptable for us.
Then we compare this calculation, matte
expectation, with acceptability.
There are some problems here.
The problem is that the risk acceptability
should be determined by
the Board of Directors.
I may not have much experience,
but I have never seen the Board
of Directors at a reasonable
time at the next meeting
say that we can accept such a risk.
Per this is due to the fact that the
risk-making procedure is six
months and you just need to understand
what exactly the risk management
system gives and after the Board
of Directors realizes it will be
easy to say.
Therefore, at this stage, it is enough
to simply act in the traditional
way, to determine the acceptability
of risk as a percentage of any amount.
From what amount?
First, it is the value of net assets,
it may be the capitalization of the
business, it may be the net profit,
it may be the EBITDA, it may be
some kind of ordinary
numerical value.
In the example you see, we have a
risk of 32 million rubles in monetary
valuation, the acceptability for
us as 5% of the value of net assets
is 40 million rubles, that
is, we consider the risk acceptable.
Based on this method, we get a comparison
of each of the risks and move
to the most interesting
in risk management, to the formation
of risk maps.
Here is an example of the simplest
card, that is, our 34 risks
are distributed within very
high, medium, small, small,
damage small, large.
In principle, it is enough, the line
of tolerance here is difficult to carry
out, but obviously in the upper right
corner the risks are significant for us.
The map is better, it is quickly
built, no quantitative estimates
are needed, it can be formed
within an hour by expert method.
The next map I want to present
is a map with a logarithmic
scale along the damage axis.
The map is good because it looks the most
beautiful of all, but what is the problem?
The problem of perception.
At the same horizontal distances,
risks differ not twice as
it would seem, but in order.
If you look at, for example, the
difference between 19 and 16 risks and
the difference between 29
and 27 is not as much as it seems.
And again, the line of tolerance about
what it is doesn't look very
beautiful.
The most beautiful map is a map
based on quantitative
estimates and with linear
scales of probability and damage.
Here is the map.
You see, not all risks are accommodated.
This is actually not something terrible.
What is on the map?
Anything that lies above the
line of tolerance is significant risks
for us.
That is, they are critical
risks for us, and we
must pay attention
to them and think what
to do.
There are acceptable risks.
The risk is below the tolerance line.
In fact, they also have to fight,
that is, to manage them.
However, the Board of Directors
may not be concerned about
them.
Well, the most interesting question
that arises when reading such
a risk map is why the line
of tolerance, how it is
formed, what it is.
So, the line of tolerance, why is
it in this form?
The probability multiplied by damage
is equal to a constant.
Accordingly, if we build the probability
function of damage, we get the probability
equal to the constant divided
by damage, that is, the probability
is the unit of x of damage.
This hyperbol is actually
depicted here.
Why are they two?
Two of them, because, for example,
I decided to show both 5%
of capitalization in this case
and 10% of net profit.
The point is net profit, the
fat red line is capitalization.
What is a good risk card?
Well, first, when you form
it for absolutely everyone, both
owners and management, it will
be very interesting.
I have never seen people show
no revival when presenting
such a map.
The second moment.
What is good about this idea, reports
on risks and diagnosis of the enterprise,
the fact that literally on one page,
especially if you put the legend
right, you will see absolutely
all the risks.
That is, if you describe it all
in words, how consultants
had such a genre, the diagnosis
report could be about many
volumes.
In general, this risk map is a
good substitute for this whole report.
Another very interesting feature of this card
is that you know the matter, and the
Board of Directors knows, and
the top management knows.
Therefore, the risks imposed
on the list are likely not to be.
However, in the mutual arrangement
of these risks, it may be that the Board
of Directors and top management have
not paid attention to what is threatening
the business in a good way.
That is the value of this map.
Literally, such a page can completely
reverse the idea of
the future strategy, what
to do, the role of top
management, the tasks facing
top management, the adoption
and decision of the Board
of Directors.
So, we have formed a risk map and together
with the description of risks we pass it on to
the Board of Directors.
We are waiting for decisions about
what risks we take and what risks
we will try to minimise.
As a result of the decision, and in
fact in life it is often not the
results of the decision, but
the results of the risk manager's
work, there is a program of
risk management activities.
Before we begin to consider
the risks of a conditional
mechanical plant, I will tell
you about the typical risk management
measures.
The first type of action is to
avoid risk.
When is it necessary?
If you have a business, for example, you
understand that the business is risky.
The most traditional way, the
easiest way to get rid of it, is
to sell the business.
Maybe it is selling an asset.
abandon the project.
If you understand that the risks
of a project are very large,
then naturally you can abandon
the project and change the strategy
in some way.
A very typical example is the exit from the
market.
That is, we, say, stop working
with individuals, or we,
on the contrary,
focus on working with
individuals and give up
corporate clients.
The next type is the transfer of risk.
This usually includes insurance.
If you choose insurance, and you
naturally choose for a part of
the risks, in particular, fires,
pay attention to the fact that you
need to insure not so much asset.
It often happens that the value of an asset
is not fundamental to us.
Interruption of activities is essential.
Insurance against such loss, from the
fact that we will stand for 3 months
or six months, is very important,
and this risk needs to be insured.
The next type is hedging.
Hedging is very important for such risks
that are not dependent on stock
exchange prices, say, and a very
traditional way of transferring risk
is outsourcing.
What is outsourcing?
You can build yourself, you can take
a construction company.
Once you enter into a contract with a
construction company, and the contract
is competent, for breaking deadlines,
for that, for that, for that, these risks
do not interest you, and
let professional builders with them be managed.
The same with transportation.
You can have your own transport
company, you can outsource it.
Unfortunately, of course, the
service market is not very large,
but I think it will continue
to develop and more and more
activities can be transferred
to outsourcing, and thus take
on a significant amount of
risk and engage only in
the main activity.
The next type of risk is risk
retention, well, for example, conscious
acceptance.
We know that we have 3, 5, 10 injuries
every year in the production.
We will fight this, but
for now, the price
of human life is not very high.
In general, in fact, we accept it and
will simply pay the employees who
suffered according to the
collective agreement, because
such a serious management of
this risk, a serious reduction in
the possible current, if each employee
will consecrately observe the
official instructions.
In Russia, especially in large
companies, this is almost impossible.
Another type of risk retention
is self-insurance, that is, this
is what I have said several times
today, it is we form a certain
reserve under some risk.
That is, we know that it can
happen and plan some money
in advance to cover
such a risk.
Well, the most interesting is a method
called “measuring the
effects of risk.”
There can be a lot of options here.
This slide gives a few basic techniques,
in fact, there are quite a lot
of them, but let's go through.
Efficient capital use is the definition
of capital needs and the most
rational use of the resources
allocated by the Board of
Directors to ensure
the greatest sustainability.
Well, for example, for hazards,
it is not necessary
to change all equipment
in terms of sustainable
operation of the enterprise.
Usually, it is enough to replace the
energy equipment, and in general,
everything.
That is, once we replace energy
equipment, we will already become
much more sustainable.
The perfection management system is
a change in structure, change
in processes, change in the end of
the system of internal control of
the installation.
A significant number of risks are also reduced.
Pay attention to strategic
management and strategic
decision-making.
Change the sequence
of actions in strategic
decisions may greatly
reduce the risk of a strategic
decision being wrong.
It is obvious that it is important
not to lose speed, because speed
is also important.
But if it is a decision made
by one person, it is likely to
be a significant risk.
Property protection is a
typical activity.
There is no security, strengthen the security,
it is the easiest.
More complex is the legal protection
of property interests, for example, the
division of ownership of assets
and operational management,
that is, the construction of a legal
structure in Russia and the scheme
of financial and economic
activities to it.
It can significantly reduce many
risks, including non-friendly
absorption.
A separate type of activity is the formation
of a plan of action in crisis situations,
which I will talk about
a little later.
We are returning to
our conditional mechanical plant,
as we plan to continue to function.
We will not give up on projects,
we will not sell business, so we will
consider only three types - transfer,
retention and mitigation of consequences.
Transfer of risks is the risk of dangers.
The risk must be insured
not only from property
losses.
And risk needs prices, you can apply
such a method, such a risk
management, as hedging.
A very good example in the
airline – fuel is constantly increasing,
at the time of recording at least.
Companies that properly
hedge, conclude long-term
contracts, use all sorts
of tools, they remain
in much less loss than an
airline that buys fuel
every day.
In terms of risk retention.
If you pay attention to the card,
then usually hold risks, which
are not very large.
Examples of such risks are the arrival
of foreign competitors.
Why is?
Because we assessed this risk, which
seems to sound awful, but it turned
out they would come.
This often happens.
Because the market does not know,
the products are not very suitable for
our conditions.
Especially because of the
great complexity.
So, yes, they will come, somewhere from
us bitten, but bitten, nothing terrible.
The population of Russia will continue
to decline.
We can somehow help, but what
is called not now, but a little
later, so this risk will also
be held.
Loss of liquidity.
There should be no losses, such as
not very large in the current calculation.
Until the situation has changed, we
will simply be re-credited
at some point with a more expensive loan.
Nothing terrible.
The excessive number of staff
can also do nothing.
We will keep, we will pay.
And separately, it would seem, the risks
of danger are always feared.
There are risks that are not feared.
In our case, let it be this conditional
pipe that goes under the
factory.
That is, yes, we will keep, yes, we
know that once every 10 years such
an accident occurs, but we can
do nothing especially, no one will
insure us for it.
No one will take this risk.
Interesting measures to mitigate
the effects of risks.
Let's start with the management
system, such a very typical example.
If you remember, there was a risk
when we had ineffective marketing costs.
With careful analysis, it
may be that the functions of
marketing and sales are combined.
Therefore, changing the structure,
for example, the separation of marketing
and sales to separate the
marketing and sales division,
will most likely reduce
this risk a little.
Because there will be
two top managers, and their interests
will somehow arise a conflict of interests.
Establishment of internal control system.
In terms of operational risks, we do
not suspect our sellers on the repayments.
Therefore, we believe that the process
of granting discounts is
ineffective, but at the same time
internal control will reduce some
risks of danger, in particular
theft, in particular, theft.
In fact, if you look at the map,
the risk of outbreaks can be
quite significant.
We have repeatedly found that
they can be managed well.
A separate control subsystem is
a risk of improving such a subsystem.
It also always happens that we
need to put in our case this
management of inventory.
We are individual because
we have many.
Just by elementary algorithms we
entrust to him to manage our remains.
Develop a plan of action in
crisis situations.
What should this plan consist of?
The plan is the restoration of business,
the restoration of assets,
the restoration of activities, the staff.
This is part of the plan for
crisis situations.
The most typical emergency
action plan you have met
with is a fire evacuation
plan.
This is really the most typical example.
Disconnection of electricity.
With the power outage is very interesting
risk.
It would seem that it rarely happens.
There are some manufacturing
for which power outages
can have very significant
consequences.
This is the risk that is not realized
because we have two lines.
But if you look at it, two lines
on the same support.
Belas is really supportive, I don't
know about Kamaz, but I think it can too.
Until the support recovers, a few hours
will pass.
We go further, looking questioned from
one station, from one thesis.
The line between these theses will
clearly not provide our needs,
and we will not be burdened
in the first place.
At the same time, production is very dependent
on the availability of electricity, and the
plan is not ready.
Simply forming such a plan, putting
the generator and providing electricity,
you can greatly reduce the
term and not even spend
especially on insurance.
Unfriendly absorption is also a typical
risk where a plan of action in
crisis situations is needed.
We must be ready, we must
be ready from all sides.
Publication even on advertising rights,
articles absolutely in the entire press.
Letters to the prosecutor, letters to Moscow, letters
to the governor, letters to everyone.
Again, a reserve legal entity,
because if the court for some
reason imposes a limitation
on the action of one lawyer,
we will have a reserve.
This crisis action plan is
applicable to a large type
of risk, for a large
number of risks, including
market risks.
For example, someone is doing a big
action, we also have to be prepared for it.
With this method, a large
number of risks can
be managed.
The more business, the easier
risk management.
For big business, for big money,
absolutely all the risks,
strategic, legislative changes are available.
If you have an influence on the State Duma,
I'm not talking about the president, then
this risk can be removed a priori.
For competition, using administrative
resources you can minimize the effects
of competition in the markets
that are most interesting to
you, as there is nothing to do.
The more business, the more detailed
the program should be, the more
efficient its work.
As an example, I will show
the changes in strategic risks
for our conditional mechanical plant.
An elementary program of
activities can place every risk
under the line of tolerance, with
the exception of some.
The 10th risk was, and will remain.
This is the population, we can do
nothing, yes, big, but we will
live with it.
Absolutely all other risks
are very well under
the line of tolerance.
A very important point is that
the risk management is
necessary only if the cost
of the program itself
is small compared to the
change in risk.
If you are risking 100 million
rubles, in order to minimize
it, and only the risk
value is 80, then this is
probably not appropriate.
That is, the risk should be held if
it turns out that the cost of the
activities is very high.
Consider the conclusion of the risk
map of our conditional mechanical plant.
You see that the event program allows
you to manage the vast majority
of risks, that is, the vast
majority of risks can be placed
under the line of tolerance.
Well, or if not to place, it is at
least great to get close to it.
What usually happens?
If you calculate the expectations
of all risks, then, naturally, calculate
wisely so that there are
no intersecting risks.
And comparing it to the residual risk,
it will be that three, five, seven,
ten times such a decrease is more
than possible.
But what should be noticed?
Part of the risks you will not feel that
there has been a decrease.
Do you feel what?
You will not feel the lost gain.
You will feel very much all the
risks associated with direct
damage that leads to direct damage
to the company not expressed through
capitalization, which fell by 25% in
market value, namely, which led
to a deterioration in financial
outcome in the current period.
And again, such a cardboard website directors
will be very pleased.
I think that the implementation of
the program of activities, if it really
works, the thing is that in the middle
business it may never work, but,
nevertheless, it is necessary
to try.
If we can implement the program of actions,
then, in fact, there will be
a long-term sustainable development.
Before I go to the last part,
I will give two forms of risk
reporting that I think are most
convenient.
The first is a simple description, that is,
we do not make 9 charts, as the standard
recommends, but simply write everything
in one place in the description of risks.
The second is to describe activities
and compare their costs.
With the change we see from this table
in the last column that if the change
of risks is significantly greater than
the cost of measures, then it is necessary
to implement.
When forming the last
table, note that the same
event can have a significant
impact on a large number
of risks.
A very typical example
of an investment program or the
creation of a new product will affect
both the fall in revenue and the increased
competition, if we have a new product,
we are easier to compete,
and the problems with personnel,
when the lack of qualified
personnel, and there needs
500 people.
If you buy new equipment, then you
will need 50, 50 to get easier than
500 and so on.
In this case, we look at the sum of the
risk expectation that will
be removed and compare it with that.
The last thing that is needed to establish
a risk management system is to
ensure monitoring.
What is Monitoring?
The aim is to monitor the results
of risk management.
First, we control the program
itself, how it is implemented,
the risk-holders, and not
how they do something or just
write reports.
What methods exist?
The method is to control the correctness
of the identification of the risk
calculation itself, their assessment,
as far as it is acceptable for
us, not acceptable, regular audit.
Since the process needs to be continuously
improved, it is a review of
standards to identify
opportunities for improvement.
Before we move to the next section,
where I will discuss the
use of risk management in
key decisions, we will summarize
this section.
There are several types of risk cards.
The most transparent and effective
risk map, based on a quantified
estimate of calculation and effects,
presented together with a description
of the risks for the SSD.
This is the most interesting point of risk management.
The SSD must then make a decision,
in fact it does not make
a decision, but takes the risk manager.
The program of the event is being formed.
There are four types of activities.
This is the avoidance of risk, risk
transfer, risk retention and mitigation
of risk consequences.
They are all applied.
Which to apply?
First, it depends on the size of the business.
The larger the scale, the less
risk retention should be and the
greater the mitigation of consequences.
It depends on the current business strategy.
Monitoring of the implementation
of the programmes
is necessary.
Monitoring is the control
of risk management results.
In this section we also
discussed possible forms of risk reporting.
The forms are much more convenient
than recommended by standards.
They used to work on projects that
people liked.
The next section is the use of
risk management in decision-making.
What to Consider?
First, if you remember, the
formation of a risk map is
still more negative risks.
Positive risks also come
there as a lost profit.
But the basis is negative
risks.
In decision-making, the Icussie
should be considered equally.
What is the specificity
of risk management in decision-
making?
If you remember, the risk map
we considered for non-positive
risks, that is, they were also like
a lost profit, but still negative.
When making decisions, you need
to consider both positive and
negative risks, which is called, in
equal measure.
It will greatly simplify the situation if
you, when making decisions, when evaluating
any project, product, whatever, go
not only to the calculation in money,
but also to the estimation of the calculation
of risks in time.
That is, there is a project that
can be delayed for various reasons.
We will not lose money, but we
will lose a lot in time.
In order not to transfer money at the
time, it is more convenient to assess
these parameters.
And then I talk about how the
decision can change if you
use Risk Management technology.
Three products are
initially considered.
Money is enough to start just one.
There are initial calculations for the project.
The parameters of the projects can be
very different.
I have here for ease NPV and repayment
period.
In fact, you can also calculate the
internal rate of return, well,
whatever.
The main thing is to count.
You can not consider the repayment period.
Then the calculations in time to
convert into money.
So, the number one product NPV has
500 million rubles, the repayment
period is two years.
Number two product NPV billion, one
year repayment period.
And the product number three NPV 300
million rubles, the repayment period of
two years.
It would seem quite obvious that
product number two is the best.
However, we calculate the risks.
And what do we see?
We see that the risk of the product
alone we will lose about 100
million rubles.
For product number two, we will lose
just a very large amount.
Especially from the NPV of this product
700 million rubles.
I draw your attention to what often
happens when calculating that the
risks they NPV will make negative.
The project is not paid off.
It happens too.
And you should not be afraid of this.
It is real.
If you go out in the process of calculating
such a value from expectation, then
that is normal.
The product is 3.
It turns out that we are unlikely to
lose anything in the process, but we can still buy.
It happens too.
Do not be afraid of this.
And in part the time turned out that
one project will last for a year,
the other for two and a half years, and
the third half a year to drink.
Again, two and a half years is more
than a real time to delay
the project, especially if you are
working in construction.
What happened in view of the risks?
With the risks in mind, the priorities
have changed.
The second product that seemed
to us before we considered the risks
associated with this project the
best, it is actually most likely,
if not worse, not superior
to other products.
Therefore, most likely, based on these
risks, we need to get involved in the development
of product number three.
Edmina this technology, if you
remember the third example from the introduction,
allows you to take into account all
risks, either to abandon the
project in time, choose another, or
at least minimize these risks.
Here, the risks taking into account
the current situation can be added
to the graph, and what if we
manage them qualitatively.
Using basic mathematical things
allows us to digitize everything
that threatens us and really
make the most important decisions.
What decisions should be made in
this way?
First, it is the development of a strategy.
When making strategic decisions,
you do not need to pay attention
only to the financial indicators
that are laid down in the business plan.
The risks can be much greater.
The next solution is to combine investments.
Purchase of equipment.
Yes, there are cheaper equipment,
but in operation it can
be much more expensive.
There are equipment like more
expensive, but in operation it is cheaper.
There is equipment that is easy
to install and easily learned
by staff.
There is equipment that works
only in the presence of adjusters,
which need to be written
out from somewhere abroad, and
our employees will not
be able to physically work on it.
All this needs to be taken into account.
Construction is understandable.
Traditionally, a couple of years stand
on original authorization
documentation, more than familiar
to every person.
When buying business.
It is obvious that there are
positive effects of synergy, especially
when you buy a business from the
same industry.
However, there can be such
negative effects that this business
is better not to buy and develop
only your own.
More than real too.
You can read any reviews on
MND deals.
There are many ineffective purchases.
The regional expansion.
It is necessary to understand when
we go to the region, especially if
the business existed within one
region such as Moscow, St. Petersburg
or Nizhny Novgorod.
He decided to go to other regions.
What awaits us in these regions,
what risks, to assess them.
It is not necessary to
give up on projects.
It may just prove that these
risks need to be managed.
The same with reorganization.
Reorganization of any management.
Finally, assess how much the employee'
s departure will cost and how
you will deal with it.
Many of the decisions.
I would like to stress again
that we do not have to take risks
and say we will not go there.
Business and business is
risk.
The traditional phrase.
Who does not risk, does not drink champagne.
But after considering the risks, having
calculated them, what will cost in
time, in terms of time, in money, you
can already at the planning stage,
how strategies begin, ending a particular
project, learn what is waiting,
respond in a timely manner.
And then there will be no activity, as in
the case number one.
When something happens all the time,
we don't know where it
comes from, but money pays.
And the conclusion.
The organizational aspects.
Management of Risk.
The standard clearly states what is
required by the management.
First, we need to support the implementation
of a risk management system.
If the business owner, the board
of directors is not interested in
implementing risk management, then
expecting that everything will go well
is likely impossible.
The next is the distribution of responsibilities
and responsibilities.
This is the individual
who will perform the risk management
function.
The next is resources.
Often not training, resources are often
not investments, but resources are time.
That is, to distinguish employees
and say that risk management
should be.
But again, the key is the first point.
If the management of risk
management is not interested,
then you will form a risk card.
You will probably feel very well
when you are talking about
the risk that I described
two and a half years ago,
but it is unlikely that a
risk management system will
be put up as such.
Partly organizational.
How to organize?
There are two key divisions in
risk management.
The risk manager and internal auditor.
Such a modern structure and location
of the internal auditor is represented
in this figure.
The internal auditor is subject to the
audit committee of the website of the directors.
The risk management unit is subordinated
to the Director-General.
Possibly options.
In the initial stages in Russia,
it works quite well when the internal
control and risk management
unit is also in subordination
to the service of the
internal auditor.
This, of course, is a violation
of the independence of the auditor,
but in Russia it works, why not
independence, can be ensured by
other methods.
Please note that all
other units are also
involved in the risk
management system.
This is really all
units, the risk can
affect the owners.
In the end, the risk can be
absolutely everyone.
The next thing we consider is the
organizational aspect of risk
management, how it is possible
to implement the risk management
function in a real enterprise,
in real business.
First, it is naturally visible
to a dedicated specialist
or separate structural unit.
At the 5000th plant, of course, it
is not difficult to find, to allocate
a bet for a person.
It will probably be
enough for such a plant.
But first, there are problems related
to the fact that you do not want
to expand the number.
The second problem is that
not every specialist can
be found.
Therefore, the standard also recommends
consulting with an
external consultant or using
existing internal control
units.
What a good external consultant,
a freelance consultant, is good is
that he is independent of nothing.
I will continue to point out that
there are two types of risks, but
in fact, a freelance consultant
does not represent any side, he is
not involved in intra-corporate currents.
The 5000th plant, as you
understand, may have a very
curious atmosphere.
What is not very effective an external consultant,
is that he is not very interested in being
responsible for the results of his work.
Second, if it changes often, then
it may turn out that everyone
will have to dive again.
Not the legal person changes
often, but the natural person.
That is, who performs the
risk management procedures in the
company, he needs to get into it
and so on.
It does not always happen well.
The most effective is
the internal control unit.
That is, the unit that
makes changes to internal
control, it is also
well aware of all
risks, can identify them.
He can manage them, recommend how
to manage them.
The problem in what?
The problem is the internal
control unit.
It generally does not take
into account such strategic risks.
And as we know, they are the most important
and when assessed they are the most significant,
unlike all the others, which
you can close your eyes to.
What functions should be performed
by the risk management unit, it does not
matter how it will be organized there.
First, develop a risk
management strategy.
The development must be approved by the Board of Directors.
Its only task to develop.
Development of risk management
measures.
That is, all that we did, but in application
to a particular factory.
Preparation of reports and development
and review of the risk management
process itself.
This is important because the situation
is changing.
At least, the line of tolerance can clearly
depend on the stage of business
development.
In the end, an internal audit
should be done.
Of course, it is an audit
to provide a guarantee of effectiveness.
The Board of Directors is convinced that the
process is actually going on.
Both the internal audit standards
and the risk management
standards prescribe that the
internal audit should actively
support, participate, train
employees, promote risk
management, promote risk
identification, help assess
if necessary.
This depends on the development
of internal audit.
Someone is barely leading
this process, someone
is on the side, refusing to consult.
But this is also acceptable in
accordance with internal
audit standards and risk
management standards.
The internal audit is also organizational
in providing all the risks
reports and reports on the
implementation of the programmes
of activities that are provided
in the Board of Directors.
I will summarize the results of this course.
So what have we learned?
We learned what is risk management,
what is risk management, what
are the standards of risk management.
We looked at the company standard.
Within the framework of this standard,
they learned to identify
risks, calculate them, form risk
maps, and form risk management
activities programs.
They also understand the units
that have to deal with risk management.
There are not one, but two, including
an internal audit.
Note that management support
is required for successful
risk management.
In fact, if there is no support,
then the risk map can still be formed
as such a good exercise, but
just further the map of
the matter will not go.
What do you want to pay attention to at the end?
First, there is a standard, but you,
if you come up with something, no
problem if it goes out of the standard.
The main thing is that it is convenient for
you, the board of directors and
all the other participants in the
process to understand.
Risks are very interesting.
The most interesting risks faced
by the tundra forest are that
it is almost impossible to
build roads.
There are such trees, a maximum of
4 meters high, which cannot be cut.
It is a relic forest on the border
of Komi and Ninin Autonomous
District.
It is possible to obtain permission, but
it is associated with very large difficulties
for the cutting of the forest.
Another specific risk is associated with the
Fund for the Support of the Governor's Good Initiatives.
The risk is related to the fact
that some that have faced
in constitutional practice
refuse to contribute money.
This is also a very specific risk.
However, it can also be assessed
and calculated primarily the
negative consequences it will
lead to.
The last such fun risk is related
to the city of St. Petersburg.
There are new factories, Toyota,
other automobile companies.
Risk to existing.
There were several companies where
we participated as external consultants.
The risk is that the best personnel
will be recalled to these new
factories.
Risk is very well managed.
At the time of the recording of the
lecture, no enterprise was injured,
but a car giant was injured.
So, you should not be afraid of risks.
The risks are very specific.
Find out and invent.
What else would you like to note?
I would like to point out that there are two
types of risks.
The first type of risk is when
an employee is interested
in it.
That is, the employee of the enterprise
is interested in the fact that this
risk was identified, brought, and even
desirably the money for it was received.
These are all risks associated
with increased competition,
equipment, personnel, and so on.
But at the same time there is a
risk when the same consequences,
but depends on the direct actions
of employees.
Of course, identifying such
risks will not be interested in any employee.
What to do in this case?
First, try to organize
two streams.
Two streams, what is it?
For example, in the market.
If there is a marketing department,
of course, ask the marketing department,
there is a market forecast.
Try to find an independent study.
If it is a production facility,
try to independently assess the
condition of the
production facility.
Because the same major accident
is of course the easiest to
attribute to the ageing of technology,
but it can occur due to
unskilled personnel, due to
unskilled management,
because of the fact that equipment
is just poorlyined in
this state.
As for the staff, try
to organize two streams.
Whether it is something we
have with the motivation system
is not that we pay, gently speaking,
people are not as much as they
are, yes, or we really have
objective problems, as in
a town-type village, when people
leave and find there a qualified
employee, including a risk
manager is almost
impossible.
Here, using these two streams
will allow you to understand the risks
quite objectively.
Use the principle that the internal
audit will provide.
Information obtained from the audit
client, that is, from the one you
are checking, is one of the
most unreliable.
You don't need to hang your
ears on your ears, think for yourself.
And, in general, with such
elementary thinking you can and identify
the risks, and calculate them normally,
and the card you will get beautiful.
That is, you will not have 400 risks
there on this map.
And the board of directors you will
be able to be interested, and the money
to get on it, and the program of events
to use competently for the really
main goal of increasing the
sustainability of business
activities.
Good luck with risk management.
At least from this course, you
can emphasize, first,
try to form a map of risks,
understand what to pay
attention to.
Someday you will
become the biggest, the
top managers.
In this regard, I hope you remember
this course.
may be useful.
Good luck to all.
thanks to.